README.md, before:

# Nextflow Pipeline for QC and Clustering of MxIF Datasets

Pipeline visualized below

<img src="https://github.com/dimi-lab/mxif_clustering_pipeline/blob/main/images/mxif-pipeline.png" width=1000>

## Requirements/Dependencies

-   Nextflow 23.04.2
-   pandoc 3.1.2
-   R 4.2.2
-   R Packages
    -   knitr 1.44
    -   ggplot2 3.4.4
    -   data.table 1.14.8
    -   dplyr 1.1.3
    -   Seurat 4.9.9
    -   progressr 0.14.0
    -   kableExtra 1.3.4
    -   ComplexHeatmap 2.15.4
    -   ggridges 0.5.4
    -   clustree 0.5.0
    -   pheatmap 1.0.12
    -   plyr 1.8.9
    -   pander 0.6.5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Instructions

Note: This pipeline requires exported QuPath (0.4.3) measurement tables (quantification files) generated from segmented single cell MxIF images.

1.  Clone repository to your machine
2.  Place quantification files in `data` directory
    i.  Files should be in the format `<fov_name>.tsv` or `<fov_name>.csv` (e.g. `region_001.tsv`)
3.  Adjust configuration values in `configs.csv`
4.  Add desired markers to `marker_confings.csv`
    i.  If markers are not provided, the quantification file will search for a default list of markers; if all default markers are not present, all markers in the dataset will be used, excluding DAPI.
5.  Call main pipeline script: `nextflow run main.nf`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Configurable parameters

| object               | value                                                                   |
|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| sigsum_quantile_high | Upper quantile cutoff for sigsum filtering (default 0.99)               |
| sigsum_quantile_low  | Lower quantile cutoff for sigsum filtering (default 0.05)               |
| bin_size             | Size of bounding box for low-density cell search (default 50)           |
| density_cutoff       | Cutoff number of cells defined as low-density (default 5)               |
| cluster_metric       | Metric to use for Seurat clustering (default Median)                    |
| min_clusters         | Minimum number of clusters for per-ROI clustering in Seurat (default 6) |
| min_metaclusters     | Starting number of metaclusters to create (default 5)                   |
| max_metaclusters     | Ending number of metaclusters to create (default 10)                    |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Analysis steps and outputs

**QC.Rmd**

-   QC_report\_\<roi_name\>.html
    -   One report per ROI
    -   Includes plots for sigsum cutoffs and bin density flags
    -   Reports how many cells were flagged by each metric
-   all_markers_clean\_\<roi_name\>.csv
    -   Quantification file in the same format as input files but with additional columns for QC metrics and QC flags

**clustering.Rmd**

-   clustering_report\_\<roi_name\>.html
    -   Clustree plot, selected resolution, marker vs cluster heatmaps and ridgeplots
-   clusters\_\<roi_name\>.html
    -   Clusters mapped to cell coordinates - includes artifacts

**metaclustering.Rmd**

-   metaclustering_report.html
    -   Marker vs metacluster heatmaps; barplots for proportion of ROI per metacluster
-   \<roi_name\>\_mapped_metaclusters_n\_metaclusters.csv
    -   Clusters and metaclusters mapped to cell coordinates - includes artifacts

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Example Data

Within the data directory of this repository, there is a sample dataset with four quantification files generated using images from the [Multiplexed Imaging Mass Cytometry of Chemokine Milieus in Metastatic Melanoma](https://zenodo.org/records/6004986) dataset (Hoch et al. 2022). The templates for configs.csv and marker_configs.csv have been set up for this dataset, therefore you can run a test of the pipeline by cloning the repo, unzipping the files into the data directory, and running `nextflow run main.nf` from the top-level directory.

Hoch, T., Schulz, D., Eling, N., Martínez-Gómez, J., Levesque, M., & Bodenmiller, B. (2022). Multiplexed Imaging Mass Cytometry of Chemokine Milieus in Metastatic Melanoma - Raw Data. <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6004986>

Commit message:

Added flag info to README

README.md, after:

# Nextflow Pipeline for QC and Clustering of MxIF Datasets

Pipeline visualized below

<img src="https://github.com/dimi-lab/mxif_clustering_pipeline/blob/main/images/mxif-pipeline.png" width=1000>

## Requirements/Dependencies

-   Nextflow 23.04.2
-   pandoc 3.1.2
-   R 4.2.2
-   R Packages
    -   knitr 1.44
    -   ggplot2 3.4.4
    -   data.table 1.14.8
    -   dplyr 1.1.3
    -   Seurat 4.9.9
    -   progressr 0.14.0
    -   kableExtra 1.3.4
    -   ComplexHeatmap 2.15.4
    -   ggridges 0.5.4
    -   clustree 0.5.0
    -   pheatmap 1.0.12
    -   plyr 1.8.9
    -   pander 0.6.5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Instructions

Note: This pipeline requires exported QuPath (0.4.3) measurement tables (quantification files) generated from segmented single cell MxIF images.

1.  Clone repository to your machine
2.  Place quantification files in `data` directory
    i.  Files should be in the format `<fov_name>.tsv` or `<fov_name>.csv` (e.g. `region_001.tsv`)
3.  Adjust configuration values in `configs.csv`
4.  Add desired markers to `marker_confings.csv`
    i.  If markers are not provided, the quantification file will search for a default list of markers; if all default markers are not present, all markers in the dataset will be used, excluding DAPI.
5.  Call main pipeline script: `nextflow run main.nf`
    i.  By default, all three steps will run (QC, clustering, metaclustering). It is a good idea to first run the QC by itself by using the `--qc_only` flag. If you want to run both the QC and clustering steps, use `--qc_and_cluster`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Configurable parameters

| object               | value                                                                   |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| sigsum_quantile_high | Upper quantile cutoff for sigsum filtering (default 0.99)               |
| sigsum_quantile_low  | Lower quantile cutoff for sigsum filtering (default 0.05)               |
| bin_size             | Size of bounding box for low-density cell search (default 50)           |
| density_cutoff       | Cutoff number of cells defined as low-density (default 5)               |
| cluster_metric       | Metric to use for Seurat clustering (default Median)                    |
| min_clusters         | Minimum number of clusters for per-ROI clustering in Seurat (default 6) |
| min_metaclusters     | Starting number of metaclusters to create (default 5)                   |
| max_metaclusters     | Ending number of metaclusters to create (default 10)                    |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Analysis steps and outputs

**QC.Rmd**

-   QC_report\_\<roi_name\>.html
    -   One report per ROI
    -   Includes plots for sigsum cutoffs and bin density flags
    -   Reports how many cells were flagged by each metric
-   all_markers_clean\_\<roi_name\>.csv
    -   Quantification file in the same format as input files but with additional columns for QC metrics and QC flags

**clustering.Rmd**

-   clustering_report\_\<roi_name\>.html
    -   Clustree plot, selected resolution, marker vs cluster heatmaps and ridgeplots
-   clusters\_\<roi_name\>.html
    -   Clusters mapped to cell coordinates - includes artifacts

**metaclustering.Rmd**

-   metaclustering_report.html
    -   Marker vs metacluster heatmaps; barplots for proportion of ROI per metacluster
-   \<roi_name\>\_mapped_metaclusters_n\_metaclusters.csv
    -   Clusters and metaclusters mapped to cell coordinates - includes artifacts

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Example Data

Within the data directory of this repository, there is a sample dataset with four quantification files generated using images from the [Multiplexed Imaging Mass Cytometry of Chemokine Milieus in Metastatic Melanoma](https://zenodo.org/records/6004986) dataset (Hoch et al. 2022). The templates for configs.csv and marker_configs.csv have been set up for this dataset, therefore you can run a test of the pipeline by cloning the repo, unzipping the files into the data directory, and running `nextflow run main.nf` from the top-level directory.

Hoch, T., Schulz, D., Eling, N., Martínez-Gómez, J., Levesque, M., & Bodenmiller, B. (2022). Multiplexed Imaging Mass Cytometry of Chemokine Milieus in Metastatic Melanoma - Raw Data. <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6004986>
